Review of "Adventures of a mathematician" by S. Ulam

Being a scientist I always believed in the ability of human thought to change the history. One of the best example is the life of Stanislaw Ulam - a Polish mathematician who once said: "It is still an unending source of surprise for me to see how a few scribbles on a blackboard could change the course of human affairs". The proof of this ambitious statement can be found in his autobiography "Adventures of a mathematician".

Stanislas Ulam grew up in the heart of polish school of mathematics - Lwow. In his youth he was influenced by works of Sierpinski, Banach and Steinhaus. After he joined the University of Lwow, he quickly became involved in the informal meetings at various Cafes, where he discussed hard mathematical problems with fellow mathematicians. His early work attracted attention of a famous American mathematician, John von Neumann, who offered him a scholarship in Stanford and then invited him to work in war-time atomic bomb laboratory in Los Alamos.

Although young Ulam focused on abstract mathematical problems arising from set and number theory, his interests gradually shifted to practical applications of mathematics in physics and biology. In Los Alamos he help to design the hydrogen bomb and showed that the initial projects were not feasible, because the chain reactions would not spread quickly enough. By doing this he initiated new fields of mathematics including the branching theory and Monte Carlo analysis.

In his autobiography Ulam describes vividly the mathematical community of XX century. He never bores the reader with the details of his mathematical achievements, but he gives a good feeling of what it means to be a mathematician. He illustrates his adventures with countless anecdotes about himself and his colleagues. One of them describes how an absent-minded scientist breached the Los Alamos security by calling "Bohr principle" the "Nicholas Baker principle" (Nicholas Baker was code name of Niels Bohr, discoverer of an electron whose involvement in Los Alamos project was top secret). At times Ulam does not fear to strike a more serious note, for example, when he ponders upon the biological basis of the creative process.

"Adventures" is an entertaining book, especially for readers interested in the details of mathematical thinking. However, it fails short in the description of the ethics of scientific research, which should be important for work that changed the course of world history.
